---
title: Event Systems
date: 2025-01-04
tags: software
draft: true
---
Working in video games and at Unity has exposed me to a lot of interesting problems around event systems in software. This post is about those event systems, the problems they can have, some of the potential solutions and finally: what I think is a good model for event systems in general, abstracted out from just video games to all software.

First, some background: what's an event system? (my understanding anyway)

You write software and eventually it gets complicated enough that you group related functionality together. This could be a class, a service, a system. The immediate problem to tackle then is: how does one class talk to another? How does one service or system communicate a change to another? That's where event systems step in. It's the middle-man that passes messages around.

Video games have lots of different kinds of event systems. Some differences are subtle but can have large consequences.

A really simple event system could be something like:
* Any system can register to "listen" to an event by name
* Any system can broadcast an event, triggering any listeners

```js
class EventSystem
{
    RegisterListener(eventName, onEvent)
        => _listeners[eventName].Add(onEvent);

    BroadcastEvent(string eventName)
        => _listeners[eventName].ForEach().Invoke();
}
```

And even with pseudocode we can foresee some consequences of our choices:

1. Events are synchronous:

When an event is broadcast, all of its listeners are invoked immediately. What happens if one system does something really complicated or expensive when it hears an event? Everything slows down.

2. Systems that Register as listeners have no knowledge of systems that broadcast events (and vice versa):

This can be good: It means that adding or removing listeners doesn't affect the broadcaster system. If I have an event "Player leveled up" and want to create a new special effect whenever the player levels up, I can create a new system for it without having to change the broadcast.

This can also be bad: As a broadcaster I have no control over who listens to an event or what order they execute in. This could result in order-of-execution bugs, or race conditions in multi-threaded environments, etc.

---

Seeing this, you might think, "we can fix that!". Let's make the event system async so there's no performance pitfalls and set it up so that listeners register directly on the broadcasters, who can then order them correctly.

But then you get *other* issues, like:

* Debugging becomes a nightmare: You put a breakpoint in a system and trace the callstack up to an event listen, but you have no idea which exact entity broadcast the event in the first place because it was done out of sync. Even if you do (by keeping metadata around), it's difficult to get full debugger data on that entity and its previous calls without doing some hard work isolating the number of broadcasters and listeners that are executing.

* Changing code becomes a nightmare: You want to add a new system and now you have to also touch the broadcaster. Maybe you and another developer on the team are both working with the same broadcaster and now you have to figure out who's system is called first and resolve git merge conflicts when your changes inevitably touch the same lines of code.

---

All this to say: There *is no perfect solution*. There are just trade-offs.




